might start dry but it won’t last
because here comes the heavy rain,
the wind getting stronger into the
afternoon and in the evening,
picking up on Sunday. Inland gusts
of 50-60
of 50—60 miles an hour, stronger
of 50-60 milas an hour, stronger
around
of 50—60 miles an hour, stronger
around western and southern coasts,
difficult travelling conditions.
More rain overnight
You have never met a man
likeJimJones.
My father was building
a new kingdom for himself.
The more power he got,
the darker the story got.
910 died...
Someone wants you dead. Someone
paid them to put a curse on you.
What do I do to stop it?!
If you’re cursed, you’re cursed.
They’re witches!
GLASS SMASHES
Tonight, we are in Dundee. Welcome
to Question Time.
On tonight’s panel, Tom Tugendhat, a
Conservative backbencher and
influential chair of the foreign
inﬂuential chair of the foreign
select
influential chair of the foreign
select committee, a form of
Lieutenant Colonel in the TA who
served in a frank and if Dennis Tom.
Ian Murray, currently the only
labour
Labour MP in Scotland and candidate
labour MP in Scotland and candidate
to
Labour MP in Scotland and candidate
to become deputy leader. The SNP’s
justice and home affairs
spokesperson at Westminster, 3
spokesperson at Westminster, a
trained lawyer, she led the legal
challenge in Scotland to Boris
johnson’s
Johnson’s decision to prorogue
Parliament and she won, Joanna
Partiament and she won, joanna
Cherry. Alex
Parliament and she won, Joanna
Cherry. Alex Massie, journalist,
Times, Liszt and Scotland editor of
the Spectator. And for three decades
one of the country’s best loved
one of the countrrs best loved
crime
one of the country’s best loved
crime writers and dedicated Raith
Rovers supporter, Val McDermid.
Welcome to our panel, to you at home
and to the audience here and, as
usual, our
usual, ouraudience
and to the audience here and, as
usual, our audience has been
selected to reflect the current
selected to reﬂect the current
political
selected to reflect the current
political picture in Scotland, so
that means there are more SNP than
Conservative or Labour supporters
Conservative or labour supporters
plus a smaller
Conservative or Labour supporters
plus a smaller number from other
parties, and I look forward to
hearing from all of you, but you at
home ran join
home ranjoin in
hearing from all of you, but you at
home canjoin in the
home can join in the conversation on
home ranjoin in the conversation on
social
home can join in the conversation on
social media. Let’s have our first
question, which is from Chris Marks.
Evening. Was Sajid Javid right to
Evening. Was Sajid javid right to
resign as
Evening. Was Sajid Javid right to
resign as Chancellor today? A bit of
a shock, wasn’t it? Very much so.
Would you have resigned in those
circumstances? I think anybody who
works in politics knows that it is a
works in politis knows that it is a
team game.
works in politics knows that it is a
team game. You rely on the team you
work with to give you honest advice.
You built up a team slowly over
years and you trust people you work
years and you trust peopla you work
with, and so,
years and you trust people you work
with, and so, if you can’t keep your
team, then it does make your ability
to conduct business that you feel
you have to do very difficult. So I
totally understand him. So Sajid
javid
Javid resigned. He said he felt he
javid resigned. He said he felt he
had no
Javid resigned. He said he felt he
had no choice but to take the
decision he did, because his team of
special advisers,
specialadvisers, he
decision he did, because his team of
special advisers, he was being told
his team special advisers had to go
if he was going to carry on, and he
would have to use advisers from
Number Ten,
NumberTen, I understand it.
would have to use advisers from
Number Ten, I understand it. Was he
put in a position where he had no
choice? Is that what Boris
choice? Is that what BorisJohnson
choice? Is that what Boris johnson
wanted, do
choice? Is that what BorisJohnson
wanted, do you think? Is it
effectively constructive dismissal?
Or is it what Dominic Cummings
wanted? This is not the first time
there have been disagreements
between numbers ten and 11. It only
been Chancellor for eight months and
had never delivered a Budget. I
think any government, a new Prime
Minister, especially one who has
just won a large majority, has the
right to have the team around them
that they want, and part of that
team is fundamentally down to the
advisers who make up the team. So I
understand Number Ten’s desire to
stamp its authority at this stage. I
think Surjit Shavit has behaved with
integrity and been loyal to his
team, and so I have a lot of respect
for his decision. —— Sajid Javid has
for his decision. -- Sajid javid has
behaved
for his decision. —— Sajid Javid has
behaved with integrity. He was right
to resign and he’s come up in my
estimation today for doing that. I
have only been in politics for five
have only been in politic for five
years but I’ve
have only been in politics for five
years but I’ve learned it’s
absolutely vital to have advisers
and staff around you that you can
and staff around you that you ran
tmst. It’s
and staff around you that you can
trust. It’s not unheard of in
tmst. It’s not unheard of in
politic for
trust. It’s not unheard of in
politics for people to be surrounded
politic for peopla to be surrounded
by advisers
politics for people to be surrounded
by advisers and staff that they
can’t trust. Clearly, Sajid Javid
can’t tmst. Clearty, Sajid javid
had a
can’t trust. Clearly, Sajid Javid
had a team that he felt he could put
his trust in, and that was going to
be taken away from him, and he would
have put round him people chosen by
have put round him peopla chosen by
Boris johnson
have put round him people chosen by
BorisJohnson or, should I say,
Boris johnson or, should I say,
probably by
BorisJohnson or, should I say,
probably by Dominic Cummings, who
seems to be pulling the strings in
this government. 50
this government. Sol
seems to be pulling the strings in
this government. 50 I think he was
this government. So I think he was
right to resign. I
this government. 50 I think he was
right to resign. I applaud him for
doing so. I suspect that Boris
johnson
Johnson thought he could get away
johnson thought he could get away
with this,
Johnson thought he could get away
with this, and that Sajid Javid
wouldn’t resign, and that’s why I
55V
say that Mr
wouldn’t resign, and that’s why I
say that MrJavid has gone up in my
estimation.
APPLAUSE
Alex, what does this tell us, if
Max, what does this tell us, if
anything,
Alex, what does this tell us, if
anything, about the kind of
government that we should expect?
It’s one of the interesting
questions arising from the
reshuffle, because Boris
reshuffle, because BorisJohnson was
reshufﬂa, because Boris johnson was
eluted
reshuffle, because BorisJohnson was
elected on a mandate to get Brexit
eluted on a mandate to get Brexit
done
elected on a mandate to get Brexit
done one way or another, and then to
change the subject from Brexit to
talk about just about anything else.
But it is still not clear what the
purpose of this government actually
is. what
is. What does it believe in beyond
is. what does it believe in beyond
Boris
is. What does it believe in beyond
BorisJohnson himself? I think we
Boris johnson himself? I think we
ran say it
BorisJohnson himself? I think we
can say it does believe in that!
ran say it does believe in that!
What
what is
can say it does believe in that!
What is it actually for? What is its
what is it actually for? what is its
vision for
What is it actually for? What is its
vision for the country? There is a
lot of talk about levelling up and
one—nation Conservatism, but even
one-nation Conservatism, but even
respected to
one—nation Conservatism, but even
respected to that, what one nation
are you talking about? —— restricted
are you talking about? -- restricted
to that. Are you
are you talking about? —— restricted
to that. Are you talking about the
UK as a whole, because it doesn’t
always look like that from Scotland
or Northern Ireland, where
or Northern Ireland, whereJulian
or Northern Ireland, where julian
Smith
or Northern Ireland, wherejulian
Smith was sacked as
or Northern Ireland, whereJulian
Smith was sacked as Northern Ireland
Secretary, presumably for being
rather good at his job and for
declaring last year that a no—deal
declaring last year that a no-deal
Brexit
declaring last year that a no—deal
Brexit would be suboptimal. His
sacking, in some ways, is as
significant Sajid Javid’s, because
significant Sajid javid’s, because
it
significant Sajid Javid’s, because
it demonstrates the extent to which
Number Ten will insist on absolute
personal loyalty, I think,
personal loyalty, Ithink, to
Number Ten will insist on absolute
personal loyalty, I think, to this
personal loyalty, Ithink, to this
Prime
personal loyalty, I think, to this
Prime ministerial team, and it will
do so by trying to fuse the
Treasury, numbers ten and 11 Downing
St, together in ways that other
prime ministers have been tempted to
achieve but none have ever managed
to make work, and so... But you
think about the early years of Blair
think about the earty years of Blair
and Brown,
think about the early years of Blair
and Brown, and it all fell apart a
bit towards the end, and Cameron and
Osborne, that’s exactly what they
did. Yes, but they had worked
together in opposition and arrived
in government with an idea of what
they wanted to do. Boris
they wanted to do. BorisJohnson
they wanted to do. Boris johnson
doesn’t
they wanted to do. BorisJohnson
doesn’t have any comrades or close
colleagues that he can have that
colleagues that he ran have that
sort of
colleagues that he can have that
sort of personal relationship. He is
a bit of a loner with few close
a bit of a loner with few dose
political
a bit of a loner with few close
political allies, and he is now
having to mn
having to run a different type of
administration to those of Blair and
Brown and Cameron and Osborne, who
arrived in Downing Street with a
dear
clear notion of what they wanted to
dear notion of what they wanted to
do, whether
clear notion of what they wanted to
do, whether people agreed or not.
do, whether peopla agreed or not.
johnson
do, whether people agreed or not.
Johnson doesn’t have that, and we
johnson doesn’t have that, and we
are no
Johnson doesn’t have that, and we
are no clearer after the reshuffle
are no dearer after the reshufﬂa
in terms
are no clearer after the reshuffle
in terms of discovering what it is
he wants to do and why. The man in
the blue sweater. Unbelievable,
really, that the Chancellor has only
been in position for a few months
and hasn’t even delivered a Budget,
and it looks to me as if Dominic
Cummings is the man who is
dominating proceedings. Is senior
political adviser. You only
speculate. We should try and get
Dominic Cummings on here one day.
with
With house prices in London sky
with house prices in London sky
high, might
With house prices in London sky
high, might Boris
high, might BorisJohnson be best
high, might Boris johnson be best
chucking the
high, might BorisJohnson be best
chucking the chancel out, knocking
down the walls and having some extra
foot for himself? We saw he just
took a holiday with £15,000 and we
don’t know where the money came
from, so let’s put that to the
panel. Is Boris
panel. Is BorisJohnson
from, so let’s put that to the
panel. Is BorisJohnsonjust
panel. Is BorisJohnson just trying
panel. Is Boris johnson just trying
to do an
panel. Is BorisJohnsonjust trying
to do an impression of Donald Trump
to do an impression of Donald Tmmp
and sacking
to do an impression of Donald Trump
and sacking anybody who disagrees
with him?
APPLAUSE
Picking up that point, he is a
relatively new Prime Minister and
he’s got a massive majority. Why
shouldn’t he decide who he wants and
who he doesn’t? I think there is
something to be said for that. For
Sajid javid, I
Sajid Javid, I think it was a
difficult decision, and you build
your team around people you trust
your team around peopla you trust
and you are
your team around people you trust
and you are told, that what is
going, you get what you are given.
It must be a difficult decision at
that point to say, do I stick with
it and stay inside the tent or do I
go with my principles and leave good
go with my principlas and leave good
on him
go with my principles and leave good
on him for doing that. He had to
lose an adviser earlier on, who was
lose an adviser eartier on, who was
apparently
lose an adviser earlier on, who was
apparently frogmarched out of
Downing Street. Which is not how you
Downing Street. which is not how you
treat people,
Downing Street. Which is not how you
treat people, to be honest. What we
treat people, to be honest. what we
are seeing
treat people, to be honest. What we
are seeing speaks to be off one of
two things, it’s either a hallmark
of profound insecurity, you can’t
stand the opposition because it
stand the opposition berause it
makes you
stand the opposition because it
makes you feel insecure about
yourself and your position, or it
smacks of dictatorship, you will not
be told, you will not have
opposition, you are doing what you
want to do and, as Alex says, don’t
know what that is, and that is
worrying.
worrying. Liz Truss is now the
worrying. Liz Tmss is now the
longest
worrying. Liz Truss is now the
longest serving member of the
government, and that is interesting,
and it’s not something that people
and it’s not something that peopla
would
and it’s not something that people
would have predicted or thought
plausible six months ago. In terms
of Sajid javid
of Sajid Javid and exactly what went
of Sajid javid and exactly what went
on today, he
of Sajid Javid and exactly what went
on today, he walked in all smiles to
Number Ten and didn’t look quite as
happy when he came out. Would you
have made the same decision?
Absolutely, John is right, the
Absolutely, john is right, the
unsung
Absolutely, John is right, the
unsung heroes of politics are your
unsung heroes of politic are your
team, who
unsung heroes of politics are your
team, who work hard for little
reward, who built up that loyalty
over time, and
overtime, and I
reward, who built up that loyalty
over time, and I couldn’t do the
over time, and I couldn’t do thejob
over time, and I couldn’t do the job
I do
over time, and I couldn’t do thejob
I do without them. It must be
difficult in government and, if you
lose that team to somebody who is
the de facto Prime Minister, an
unelected official, you have to make
unelacted official, you have to make
the
unelected official, you have to make
the decision to go. Sajid Javid has
the decision to go. Sajid javid has
been in
the decision to go. Sajid Javid has
been in the
been in thejob
the decision to go. Sajid Javid has
been in the job for seven months and
I don’t think the Prime Minister
woke up this morning thinking he
would lose his Chancellor, and the
only accomplishment he has got to
his name is a 50p coin with Brexit
on the back. Surely the government
would not be taking forward the
sacking of the Chancellor in those
circumstances? But it
circumstances? But it highlights a
bigger issue, which is that a
government that is running out of
government that is mnning out of
control,
government that is running out of
control, with a large majority in
partiament,
parliament, which can’t be held to
partiament, which can’t be held to
account.
parliament, which can’t be held to
account. Joanna and I did the case
account. joanna and I did the use
that beat
account. Joanna and I did the case
that beat the government
prorogation, now they are out for
judges. They have banned journalists
from lobby at Number Ten, they are
trying to undermine civil circuits.
I think this is something that has
to be resolved, and characters like
Dominic Cummings are running the
Dominic Cummings are mnning the
show, and I
Dominic Cummings are running the
show, and I think it is the de facto
Prime Minister, and that’s not good
for democracy. In the front here.
You could argue that the behaviour
we are witnessing is the classic
behaviour of a bully. Right,
behaviour ofa bully. Right, 0K.
we are witnessing is the classic
behaviour ofa bully. Right, OK. I
am not sure what
am not sure whatJohnson would say
am not sure whatjohnson would say
about
am not sure whatJohnson would say
about that. I think today’s
reshuffle is a perfect demonstration
reshufﬂe is a perfect demonstration
that it is
reshuffle is a perfect demonstration
that it is all about self—interest
that it is all about self-interest
and
that it is all about self—interest
and showmanship for Boris
and showmanship for Borisjohnson,
and showmanship for Boris johnson,
and it has
and showmanship for Borisjohnson,
and it has not been a concise,
strategic plan. The reshuffle was
strategic plan. The reshufﬂa was
done by a
strategic plan. The reshuffle was
done by a maverick, ad hoc. It was
certainly a surprise, I think we can
certainly a surprise, I think we ran
all agree on that.
certainly a surprise, I think we can
all agree on that. Let’s move on to
another question reflecting
something a lot of have been asking.
Andrew Connelly first in light of
the Brexit vote, is it right that
Scotland should be denied a second
referendum? Quite a bit on this.
What
what a
referendum? Quite a bit on this.
What a surprise! Ian, kicked us off.
what a surprise! Ian, kicked us off.
I principally
What a surprise! Ian, kicked us off.
I principally don’t think there is a
mandate for it, and I have always
taken a principled view, and I look
taken a principlod view, and I look
forward
taken a principled view, and I look
forward to listening to what you
have to say on this issue in the
audience this evening, but I have
always taken the principled position
always taken the principlad position
that it
always taken the principled position
thatitis
that it is in Scotland’s best
interest to be a member of the UK,
and in the UK’s best interest for
that. Brexit will be bad, we don’t
know what will happen in the next 11
months we just had our fingers
crossed that things will work out. I
don’t think they will, but that’s a
different question. To have Scottish
independence on top of that, in my
view, would be the equivalent of
cutting your nose up to spite your
face, and I think we need some
answers to those questions. 50
answers to those questions. So why
is jeremy
is Jeremy Corbyn
answers to those questions. So why
isJeremy Corbyn saying, if people
is jeremy Corbyn saying, if peopla
wanted
isJeremy Corbyn saying, if people
wanted a referendum, he wouldn’t
stand in their way?
stand in theirway? I
wanted a referendum, he wouldn’t
stand in their way? I thought he was
wrong, we are an internationalist
party agreeing with solidarity and,
if you disagree with the ends, you
should disagree with the means. The
last politician to disagree with the
ends but facilitate the means was
David Cameron, and look what
happens. We have to listen to each
other and respect each other’s
opinions,
opinions, and there will be people
opinions, and there will be peopla
in
opinions, and there will be people
in the audience and across the
country who think we should have a
second independence referendum
tomorrow, but I think it would be
bad for Scotland’s interests in the
UK and the world, and we need to get
onto two big things, trying to deal
with the issue of public services in
Scotland, which have got worse for
the last ten years, and secondly,
let’s have the big questions asked.
I want a positive discussion about
why the UK is good for Scotland, and
I also want to be able to exploit my
independence. Let’s have that debate
rather than talking about the
process of whether to have a second
referendum. Maybe we’ll hear tonight
what the currency would be, the
border at Berwick, all of the
wrong—headed arguments we put in
wrong-headed arguments we put in
studios
wrong—headed arguments we put in
studios like this are exactly the
same as the ones on Scottish
independence, and we have to have
that debate.
that debate. I’m going to start by
quoting back at Ian his own words
when he supported a second EU
referendum when he said, when
circumstances change, people should
circumstances change, peopla should
be
circumstances change, people should
be allowed a second vote. Ian is
saying that was not his quote, let’s
be clear. Did you agree with it? The
8th of April 2019 in the Commons,
you said that. You said you were
paraphrasing somebody else, but
that’s what you said. When central
circumstances change, people should
circumstances change, peopla should
be
circumstances change, people should
be allowed a second vote. I know you
were talking about exit, but I’m
saying the same principle can apply
saying the same principla ran apply
to
saying the same principle can apply
to Scottish independence. In 2014,
when people in Scotland voted to
when peopla in Scotland voted to
stay in the
when people in Scotland voted to
stay in the UK, it was a very
different UK they were voting to
stay in. One of the central premises
of the Better Together campaign was
that the way to preserve your EU
citizenship was to vote to remain
part of the UK, and that is now no
longer the use,
longer the case, and we are also
longer the use, and we are also
faced
longer the case, and we are also
faced with the most right—wing
government we have seen in modern
times, which Scotland overwhelmingly
did not vote for. And I believe that
there is a mandate. The SNP, which
supports independence and a second
referendum, keeps winning elections
in Scotland, Ian, we won the last
elaction
election pretty impressively with
45% of the vote and over 80% of the
4596 of the vote and over 8096 of the
seats.
In the Scottish parliament, our
democratically elected body for
Scotland has voted to hold a second
independence referendum and the
polling suggests the majority of
peopla
people now want a second
independence referendum. This is
within the margin of error. The last
three polls have shown a majority in
favour of independence but yes, they
are close. They are within a margin
of error so they are not as strong
as you would like them to be.
Bearing this in mind, when we
started the independence referendum
campaign in 2012, we started at 28%
campaign in 2012, we started at 2896
and went
campaign in 2012, we started at 28%
and went to 45%. Some people we went
and went to 4596. Some people we went
“P
up to above 50
and went to 45%. Some people we went
up to above 50 and then fell back
but we will never be sure. Lets cut
to the chase. We want to start at
5011,
50%, that’s
to the chase. We want to start at
5096, that’s a
50%, that’s a pretty solid starting
5096, that’s a pretty solid starting
point. what
50%, that’s a pretty solid starting
point. What would you like to
point. what would you like to
happen?
point. What would you like to
happen? We have Nicola Sturgeon, who
is requesting permission,
effectively, from the Prime Minister
to be able to hold a second
independence referendum and you want
to go further. I want to be
perfectly clear that I have never
advocated a wildcat, or what some
peopla all an
people call an illegal referendum.
people all an illegal referendum.
It
people call an illegal referendum.
It would be rather surprising I did
so given I am a senior member of the
legal profession and devoted a large
part of last year to defeating Boris
johnson in
Johnson in court for doing something
johnson in court for doing something
unlawful.
Johnson in court for doing something
unlawful. However, the weight of
legal opinion is that it is by no
means certain that the Scottish
partiament
parliament doesn’t have the
competence to hold a referendum, so
I agree we should be making sure
that the referendum is properly
constituted and lawful, but I also
agree with Nicole Sturgeon, my party
agree with Nicola Sturgeon, my party
leader, that the weight of legal
opinion is that it’s not clear the
Scottish parliament doesn’t have the
Scottish partiament doesn’t have the
power to pass
Scottish parliament doesn’t have the
power to pass a bill to hold a
referendum. As Nicola has said,
it’ll be interesting to that tested.
MY
My point is that I don’t think the
Scottish electorate should be at the
mercy of Boris
mercy of BorisJohnson’s say so.
mercy of Boris johnson’s say so.
Boris
mercy of BorisJohnson’s say so.
BorisJohnson is a man with a
Boris johnson is a man with a
cavalier
BorisJohnson is a man with a
cavalier attitude towards democracy.
As we saw last year, a cavalier
attitude towards the rule of law. 50
attitude towards the ml; of law. So
I am
attitude towards the rule of law. 50
I am interested in finding ways in
which Scotland can hold a lawful
referendum. But I am more interested
in creating the vision and the
arguments that will win that
referendum. I think it is important,
to answer Ian’s point, he is simply
wrong to say that the Scottish
Government runs poorer public
services. The facts and figures
simply don’t hear that out. I’m
happy to go that later. It is also
possibla to
possible to deal with constitutional
possibla to deal with constitutional
issues
possible to deal with constitutional
issues and run the country at the
issues and nm the country at the
same
issues and run the country at the
same time. That happens in lots of
countries. Lets go back to the
audience. I gave you a
audience. I gave you along
countries. Lets go back to the
audience. I gave you a long time to
talk there. Lots of people want to
talk there. Lots of peopla want to
cut in. The
talk there. Lots of people want to
cut in. The man with the glasses. UC
you are going to be having an
advisory independence referendum.
advisory independence referendum. I
will go round the audience in a bit.
will go round the audience in a hit.
As the only remaining Labour MP in
As the only remaining labour MP in
Scotland, Ian
As the only remaining Labour MP in
Scotland, Ian Murray must see that
his party has to change their stance
on the independence referendum issue
if they want to re—engage with the
Scottish electorate. And in the
Graeme White T—shirt? —— the grey
Graeme white T-shirt? -- the grey
and white
Graeme White T—shirt? —— the grey
and white T—shirt. You said the SNP
and white T-shirt. You said the SNP
only got 4596 of
and white T—shirt. You said the SNP
only got 45% of the vote but I know
only got 4596 of the vote but I know
loads of
only got 45% of the vote but I know
loads of people who would vote for
independents who didn’t vote for the
SNP. The woman in the purple top. I
SNP. The woman in the purpla top. I
fear that
SNP. The woman in the purple top. I
fear that Brexit has become a
convenient fuel to reignite the
independence fire, and I think what
Scotland needs to hear is what the
economic arguments are for or
against independence.
against independence. Tom, Brexit is
the fuel to the independence fire.
Is this going to lie at Boris
johnson’s
Johnson’s door? I got into politics
johnson’s door? I got into politic
for a simple
Johnson’s door? I got into politics
for a simple reason, to serve our
communities and improve the lives of
the people we are lucky enough to
share these islands with. When I
share these islands with. when I
look
share these islands with. When I
look around the country and I see
the stmgglos
the struggles that we are having in
the stmgglas that we are having in
making sure
the struggles that we are having in
making sure the health service runs
well and that schools are delivering
the results we want to see for our
kids. When I look at the
infrastructure investments we need
infrastmcture investments we need
to see,
infrastructure investments we need
to see, whether it’s the Queensferry
Bridge or any other improvements we
need to get, and I see another
argument about a constitutional
change that is going to distract
politicians from serving people,
politicians from sewing peopla,
from sewing
politicians from serving people,
from serving what we really need,
from sewing what we really need,
reducing
from serving what we really need,
reducing waiting times, treating
cancer, educating kids, building the
economy, and I see instead another
argument about whether or not we
should split up our country, I have
to say I find it very sad. And I
find it very sad because this is not
an economic argument for me. This is
not an argument as to whether
Scotland is big enough or too small
or whether England would be better
or worse without Scotland. For me,
this is a fundamental argument about
who we are as a people. When I look
who we are as a peoplo. when I look
around
who we are as a people. When I look
around these islands, I am not a
foreigner in Dundee. This is our
country and we share it together. I
feel incredibly sad when people talk
feel incredibly sad when peopla talk
in a way that
feel incredibly sad when people talk
in a way that splits us and divide
us. I know politicians of all sides
do this, so it’s not a partisan
point, but
point, butl
do this, so it’s not a partisan
point, but I find it deeply sad when
actually these islands have done an
amazing thing over the last 300
years and achieved some fantastic
results. Yes, we have had some
mistakes too, but we have really
brought an awful lot to the world.
We have been a fantastic force for
good over many years. And I think
it’s a real sadness to see that
perhaps being thrown away. To pick
“P
up that point from the woman there,
do you think any of the blame for
this lies with Boris
this lies with BorisJohnson for
this lies with Boris johnson for
pushing
this lies with BorisJohnson for
pushing Brexit when Scotland voted
overwhelmingly to remain? We know
from the last referendum in 2014
that the settled will of the
Scottish people at the time was
Scottish peopla at the time was
clear. I
Scottish people at the time was
clear. I am
clear. lam not
Scottish people at the time was
clear. I am not in a position...
clear. lam not in a position... I
dear. lam not in a position... I
represent a
clear. lam not in a position... I
represent a fantastic community in
Kent, and it’s not for me to tell
the peopla
the people living here in this
wonderful part of the United Kingdom
on how they should vote or what they
should do, but I listen to those
peopla who
people who led the referendum on
both sides and I heard pretty
dearty
clearly that it was a decision for a
dearty that it was a decision for a
generation.
clearly that it was a decision for a
generation. And five years isn’t a
generation. Alex? Tom has done his
best to dodge your question, Fiona.
Did you all spot that, folks? He has
done so very eloquently and
elegantly. The answer to the
question is that yes of course,
Brexit is at the heart of this. If
it were not for Brexit then we would
not be talking about this issue
because Brexit has put it back on
the table. If you are an SNP
the tabla. If you are an SNP
supporter, it
the table. If you are an SNP
supporter, it has put it back on the
table in ways that are reasonable
table in ways that are reasonabla
and
table in ways that are reasonable
and persuasive and it makes for the
kind of material change in
circumstance that would justify a
second referendum. So from their
point of view, yes of course it is
perfectly appropriate to seek
another referendum right now.
Counter to that is also perfectly
respectable and persuasive, which is
respectabla and persuasive, which is
that
respectable and persuasive, which is
that five years is not a very long
time. And although Brexit may or may
not prove to be a terrible blunder,
or perhaps a great success, who
knows! It is not long enough to
justify revisiting a question that
everybody promised at the time would
be respected for years to come. So
you are talking about competing
claims of legitimacy. At present,
and this may of course change, and
it is on the anti—referendum side
it is on the anti-referendum side
that has
it is on the anti—referendum side
that has the ascendancy. The SNP win
plenty
planty of
that has the ascendancy. The SNP win
plenty of handsome election
victories, but it’s worth bearing in
mind the calibre of the people they
beat! But that itself is not enough
because general elections are about
a lot of different issues will stop
but when you actually ask people,
but when you actually ask peopla,
should
but when you actually ask people,
should there be an independence
referendum on the timetable
notionally favoured by Nicola
Sturgeon, that is to say this year
before the Holyrood elections next
year, most people say there should
not. The most recent YouGov poll on
this specific question show 30% of
this specific question show 3096 of
the
this specific question show 30% of
the SNP’s own supporters say there
should not be a timetable like that.
should not be a timetabla like that.
That’s why the
should not be a timetable like that.
That’s why the UK Government can get
That’s why the UK Government ran get
away with
That’s why the UK Government can get
away with saying no for the moment.
After the 2021 Holyrood elections,
depending on the results, the line
could change, but it will hold for
now because most people in Scotland
now because most peopla in Scotland
do not
now because most people in Scotland
do not want a referendum. If 80% in
do not want a referendum. If 8096 in
Scotland
do not want a referendum. If 80% in
Scotland wanted a referendum than it
would happen but as long as the
country is evenly divided then it
won’t. Good evening. I would like to
ask why the SNP think that Scotland
would be better tied to France,
Germany and desires to separate us
from England, Wales and Ireland as a
from England, Walas and Ireland as a
group. why do
from England, Wales and Ireland as a
group. Why do you think we would be
group. why do you think we would be
better off
group. Why do you think we would be
better off tied to Germany and
France? That’s not what we think. We
think Scotland would be better off
as a member of the European Union.
We also think England would be
better off as member of the European
Union. It’s my dearest wish to see
England come back to the EU and sit
at the top table alongside an
independent Scotland. What you are
independent Scotland. what you are
dearty asking
independent Scotland. What you are
clearly asking is why do you want to
dearty asking is why do you want to
separate from
clearly asking is why do you want to
separate from the rest of the UK
when you want to join the EU. We
when you want tojoin the EU. We
don’t
when you want to join the EU. We
don’t want to separate from the rest
of the UK... New kind of implied
that though. You want to stay part
of the UK? No, we want to exercise
our right to self—determination and
our right to self-determination and
become
our right to self—determination and
become an independent country. That
doesn’t have to involve separation.
We are not leaving something to stop
the United Kingdom is a union of two
nations, Scotland and England. And
the Welsh and the Northern Irish?
The act of Union was a union between
Scotland and England. If Scotland
wishes to withdraw from that union
then there will no longer be United
Kingdom in a way we understand. So
you will have left. The reason we
want to remain part of the EU is we
see Scotland’s future in the EU.
Otherwise Scotland’s future is tied
to England, completely at the whim
of what English voters choose. And
that cannot be right. I wish you
would stop interrupting me. A union
cannot be a hostage situation. And
that is rapidly what this union is
becoming because Scotland is facing
board is being set up on either side
of our country, a border with
Northern Ireland thanks to the
agreement that has been reached, and
a border with the European Union.
Why
why do you
a border with the European Union.
Why do you prefer the European
why do you prefer the European
Union, that
Why do you prefer the European
Union, that is the question. We
prefer it because the EU is a union
of equals. In the EU, if a small
country like Ireland has concerns
then those concerns are heard with
as much weight at the top table as
the concerns of France or Germany.
We saw that in the Brexit process
will stop contrast that with the way
Scotland was treated during the
Brexit process when none of our
concerns were taken on board. 50 we
concerns were taken on board. So we
prefer a union of
concerns were taken on board. 50 we
prefer a union of equals as opposed
to a union of unequal is. Many
peopla don’t
people don’t see this as a hostage
situation. APPLAUSE
INAUDIBLE
On that last point, it is not a
binary, it is not to be either part
of the UK or the EU. First of all,
what we have to do, if we so choose,
the people of Scotland, if we decide
to become an independent nation,
then at that point we decide whether
or not being part of the European
Union is what is in our best
interest. I am a passionate
interest. lam a passionate
Europhile
interest. I am a passionate
Europhile and right now I would love
us to be back in the EU. But that by
the time we gain independence which
might be next year, a few years down
the road, whenever, it might not be
the next best option. It’s not an
either or decision. It’s about
Scotland making decisions for itself
as an independent nation to stop and
to ask Ian, what would a mandate
look like? To answer that question
directly, a mandate does not look
like 4596, as
like 45%, as we had on December 12.
like 4596, as we had on December 12.
john Curtice, the
like 45%, as we had on December 12.
John Curtice, the UK’s most eminent
john Curtice, the UK’s most eminent
pollster, said
John Curtice, the UK’s most eminent
pollster, said you couldn’t
extrapolate a mandate from December
12. A mandate according to Nicola
Sturgeon 18
12. A mandate according to Nicole
Sturgeon 18 months ago
12. A mandate according to Nicola
Sturgeon 18 months ago was
consistent at 60% in the polls. What
consistent at 6096 in the polls. what
is
consistent at 60% in the polls. What
is remarkable in this whole debate
is remarkabla in this whola debate
is that
is remarkable in this whole debate
is that the SNP have existed for
nearty 70 or
nearly 70 or 80 years and still
hearty 70 or 80 years and still
can’t
nearly 70 or 80 years and still
can’t answer that Lady’s question
can’t answer that ladrs question
and
can’t answer that [5de question
and still
can’t answer that Lady’s question
and still can’t answer questions
about currency and questions about
borders and questions about how we
fulfil the deficit. We can sit and
fulfil the deficit. We ran sit and
talk
fulfil the deficit. We can sit and
talk about mandates but when will
you get onto the big issues about
what would we need to do and the
arguments around what you want to
see. ALL TALK AT ONCE
Hang on! You two are having a
private conversation of a stop it is
fascinating but there are a lot of
us that need to hear what’s going
on.
You are talking about opinion polls
and I’m talking about the mandates
of when people go to the ballot box.
of when peopla go to the ballot box.
4596 isn’t
of when people go to the ballot box.
45% isn’t a mandate. It is a
mandate. The authority of MSPs is
surely a mandate. There are lots of
hands up... Thank you. There are
lots of hands up and let’s hear from
somebody. In the red T—shirt at the
somebody. In the red T-shirt at the
front. Currency
somebody. In the red T—shirt at the
front. Currency and borders,
Scotland voted twice to stay in the
EU and avoid borders, and if England
voted to leave, borders are on
England’s fault, not Scotland’s. We
have a functional economy and we can
have a functional economy and we ran
have our
have a functional economy and we can
have our own country if we choose to
have one, but when it comes to the
union, it doesn’t matter. You will
have a functioning currency. It’s
not hard to figure out. If there is
one thing we have learnt from the
Brexit process is that division
doesn’t dry progress. We have been
told now independence, and it’s time
to stop debating it, and we need to
solve hydro deaths and other things,
because we need to discuss these
things instead of independence. The
man in the T—shirt.
man in the T—shirt. Actually, sorry,
man in the T-shirt. Actually, sorry,
the young man
man in the T—shirt. Actually, sorry,
the young man behind you. I think
it’s quite rich
it’s quite rich to have, before
Brexit, a lot of people said, we
need another referendum on the EU,
but they said with the same phase,
we can’t have another referendum on
Scottish independence. That’s why
the second EU referendum was a
stupid idea, from a Scottish
perspective. We are basically at the
whim of the English Parliament, so
will they abstain from any boats
that just
thatjust involve
will they abstain from any boats
that just involve the
thatjust involve the English? Say
that just involve the English? Say
that again?
thatjust involve the English? Say
that again? The SNP say they are at
the whim of the English Parliament,
the whim of the English Partiament,
but they take
the whim of the English Parliament,
but they take part in votes which
only concern legislation in England.
only concern lagislation in England.
English votes
only concern legislation in England.
English votes for English laws? It
is a UK Parliament. The woman with
is a UK Partiament. The woman with
the blonde
is a UK Parliament. The woman with
the blonde hair.
the blonde hair. That Scotland voted
to stay in in 2014 is very different
to now, but until Brexit is done,
and we know what UK we are staying
in? Surely we need to wait and see
what happens and then possibly
consider allowing another red
independence —— independence
referendum. I think it’s rich to
claim that you don’t want to leave
because of borders, when that wasn’t
the rase
the case with the EU. We have not
the use with the EU. We have not
negotiated a
the case with the EU. We have not
negotiated a deal yet. It hasn’t
been approved and ratified through
both parliaments. But we deserve
both partiaments. But we deserve
answers
both parliaments. But we deserve
answers to those questions and we
didn’t get them.
didn’t get them. The woman in the
black sweater. When I was at school,
black sweater. when I was at school,
45% meant there was 55% on the other
4596 meant there was 5596 on the other
side, and
45% meant there was 55% on the other
side, and 55% of voters voted not
side, and 5596 of voters voted not
for the SNP,
side, and 55% of voters voted not
for the SNP, so surely that does not
give them a mandate. Because there
is a percentage of don’t knows, so
that might not have applied at
school, I don’t know. At the heart
of this is a question of how you
think about Scotland’s future and
how you feel about it. At the
moment, in terms of cost benefit
analysis, unionism has the upper
hand in terms of financial,
technical and practical aspects of
independence that have been made
complicated and made more difficult
by Brexit but, in terms of how you
feel, the calculation is changing
feel, the ralmlation is changing
there
feel, the calculation is changing
there as well. I think it seems to
me there that the SNP and
pro—independence forces have the
pro-independence forces have the
upper hand,
pro—independence forces have the
upper hand, and opinion polling
demonstrates that. If you look at
the views of people under the age of
50.
50, .60, 65% now saying they support
50, .60, 6596 now saying they support
independence,
50, .60, 65% now saying they support
independence, and that’s getting
quite close to the settled will of
the Scottish people —type territory.
the Scottish peopla -type territory.
The
the Scottish people -type territory.
The problem
the Scottish people —type territory.
The problem for unionism is that the
9’P
gap on what you think, the
hard—headed calculation, has been
hard-headed ralmlation, has been
narrowing,
hard—headed calculation, has been
narrowing, while the gap on the how
narrowing, whila the gap on the how
do you feel has
narrowing, while the gap on the how
do you feel has been widening, and
in neither case is the direction of
in neither use is the direction of
travel working
in neither case is the direction of
travel working in unionism’s favour.
Unless it finds ways to address
that, unionism has a long—term
that, unionism has a long-term
problam, a
that, unionism has a long—term
problem, a medium—term problem and
problam, a medium-term problem and
quite possibly a
problem, a medium—term problem and
quite possibly a problem as well.
Has your position change on this in
terms of the head versus the heart?
I swivelled for a long time, on the
one hand, on the other hand, and you
ask questions and neither side could
give me a coherent answer. Really,
the basis on which I made my
decision then, and I think it’s the
same now, is I looked at what the
Scottish Parliament, not
Scottish Parliament, notjust the
Scottish Partiament, not just the
SNP at
Scottish Parliament, notjust the
SNP at the Parliament in Scotland
SNP at the Partiament in Scotland
had
SNP at the Parliament in Scotland
had done since Holyrood began in
1999, and I looked at what
Westminster had done in that same
time period, and I knew where my
heart lay and it was the same place
as my head laid, that what was best
for the people of Scotland, they
for the peopla of Scotland, they
have
for the people of Scotland, they
have been better served by what has
been done in their Parliament and
been done in their Partiament and
the country as
been done in their Parliament and
the country as a whole, and that was
the basis on which I made my
decision.
APPLAUSE
APPMUSE
I
APPLAUSE
I have a feeling this is a topic we
will be discussing for quite some
time, actually, over the next
months, years? I have no idea. We
will find out. Let me
will find out. Let me tell you where
we will be next week. We will be in
Weymouth with the chairman of the
Royal Bank of Scotland, and
commentator and former cabinet
minister and all—round train geek
minister and all-round train geek
Michael
minister and all—round train geek
Michael Portillo. After that, we
will be in Middlesbrough, so if
will be in Middlasbrough, so if
you’d like to
will be in Middlesbrough, so if
you’d like to be in the audience,
all us or go to
callus or go to the Question Time
all us or go to the Question Time
website
callus or go to the Question Time
website and follow the instructions.
Come and join us. We’d love to have
you in the audience. I will move on,
because we had a lot of questions,
and it surprisingly, on this next
issue. Tracey Colville, where are
you? Is a bridge to Ireland a bridge
too far?
LAUGHTER
Well, Ian? It’s a great
MUGHTER
Well, Ian? It’s a great question,
and is this another one of Boris’s
fantasy
fantasy projects, like the island
airport and everything else he has
come out
come outwith? He mentioned this
come out with? He mentioned this
eartier
come outwith? He mentioned this
earlier this week, in terms of H52,
eartier this week, in terms of H52,
but what
earlier this week, in terms of H52,
but what about a bridge to Ireland?
Lets look at the feasibility,
because it brings countries
together, it would be economically
wonderful, but I don’t have any
confidence any government could
deliver these big infrastructure
deliver these big infrastmclure
projects on
deliver these big infrastructure
projects on time and on budget
projects on time and on budget I
think it’s a great way of connecting
Ireland with Scotland and we should
look at it, but we have a
look at it, but we have 3 Prime
look at it, but we have a Prime
Minister
look at it, but we have 3 Prime
Minister who has spent the last
three years building walls and now
he wants to start building bridges,
so I think it’s a bit rich of him to
55V
say he was to connect himself in.
But you are saying we should look at
this? of
this? Of course, because if it
sensible and feasible... I don’t
think it is, because civil engineers
have said the water is too deep and
rough, you couldn’t do it, but if
the government wants to look at a
feasibility study, and its
deliverable, then fine. But I think
it’s maybe another one of Boris’s
fantasy projects. Is it, Tom? In
2012, an architect came up with the
idea, and the SNP welcomed it as a
link between Scotland and Ireland,
and now they are against it because
it is Boris’s idea. I think
it is Boris’s idea. Ithink
connecting
it is Boris’s idea. I think
connecting parts of this country
together is something we should look
at, and I agree with Ian, I doubt
at, and Iagree with Ian, I doubt
that the
at, and I agree with Ian, I doubt
that the feasibility project will
pay off but, you know what, a lot of
peopla were
people were very negative about the
Eurotunnel project, and that has
added enormously to all communities,
and many infrastructure projects,
and many infrastmclure projects,
like. . .
like... Many
and many infrastructure projects,
like... Many infrastructure
like... Many infrastmclure
projects,
like... Many infrastructure
projects, including things like
metropolitan railways and
undergrounds and things like that,
don’t play for themselves in terms
of ticket prices or immediate sales,
they pay in terms of the economic
activity that is conducted off the
basis of their construction. 50,
basis of their construction. So,
look, the Chinese have built bridges
longer than that. Whether they have
longer than that. whether they have
built
longer than that. Whether they have
built them in such difficult
circumstances, I am not qualified to
say, but I’d be interested to see.
The longest bridge in the world over
water connects Hong Kong to Macau,
water connects Hong Kong to Marau,
about
water connects Hong Kong to Macau,
about 30 miles, so that is a
about 30 mils, so that is a
humdinger
about 30 miles, so that is a
humdinger of a bridge!
humdinger ofa bridge! 50
about 30 miles, so that is a
humdinger of a bridge! 50 the SNP
humdinger of a bridge! So the SNP
support this?
humdinger of a bridge! 50 the SNP
support this? I am not negative
about the idea. I am sceptical about
Boris johnson’s
BorisJohnson’s and motives, and I
Boris johnson’s and motives, and I
am sceptical
BorisJohnson’s and motives, and I
am sceptical about his ability to
deliver it. I think it’s an accident
it was thrown on the table like a
dead rat
dead cat the day before he was about
dead rat the day before he was about
to
dead cat the day before he was about
to announce the increased costs of
HSZ
H52 and that they are going ahead,
and there are no real benefits for
Scotland with HSZ, but we would love
to see improved rail links between
Scotland’s major cities and
investment hubs and English cities.
That will be important whether or
not independence happens. I am not
not independence happens. Iam not
against the idea
not independence happens. I am not
against the idea because, I tell you
what, in the next ten years, looking
at the demographics and the youth
at the demographic and the youth
vote,
at the demographics and the youth
vote, Ireland will reunify and
Scotland will become independent,
and we will both be in the EU.
APPLAUSE
That is what you are hoping.
Wouldn’t it be wonderful if there
was a link for Irish trains to come
through Scotland, through expanded
pots in the south, and go direct to
the continent? Remember, when
Ireland joined the EEC in 1973, the
great bulk of their trade was with
England. Now, the balance has
changed and a significant amount is
with the EU. 50 Scotland needs to
with the EU. So Scotland needs to
look to its future markets, and our
future market is the EU, which is
eight times the size of the British
market. So I am not... I
market. So I am not... lam
sceptical
sceptialabout
market. So I am not... lam
sceptical about the engineering
aspects of the idea, I am not an
engineer, but there are long
produced elsewhere in the world. I’d
love to see improved transport links
between Ireland and Scotland, but I
very much doubt Boris
very much doubt BorisJohnson will
very much doubt Boris johnson will
be the person
very much doubt BorisJohnson will
be the person to deliver it. The
woman in the white jacket. , correct
the language we are using when
talking about Northern Ireland,
which is part of the UK, and
Ireland, which is a republic and
part of the EU? That’s a very good
point. The men behind you. Why is it
point. The men behind you. why is it
that we
point. The men behind you. Why is it
that we have consistently brought
down engineering projects? Why is it
down engineering projects? why is it
that the
down engineering projects? Why is it
that the politicians don’t grab hold
of the wealth of knowledge that we
have in this country and make this a
success? It starts from a small
seed, and it grows. We built the
Skye bridge many years ago. We can
Skye bridge many years ago. We ran
build
Skye bridge many years ago. We can
build engineering projects, we have
sent men to the moon, we’ve got the
International Space Station. Let’s
be positive about what we can do,
be positive about what we ran do,
not go by
not so by party
be positive about what we can do,
not go by party political points, by
criticising Boris
criticising Borisjohnson, because
criticising Boris johnson, because
if it was any
criticising Borisjohnson, because
if it was any other politician on
each of the individual parties they
would be supporting their own
leader. So let’s be positive about
the engineering projects that we
have in this country. And the woman
in the red top. Before we build the
bridge, had we not better sort out
the road system in Carlisle and
the road system in (“artisla and
Portpatrick?
the road system in Carlisle and
Portpatrick? At the moment, driving
along there to Cairnryan is sheer
along there to Qirnryan is sheer
hell for
along there to Cairnryan is sheer
hell for most lorry drivers and
other people.
APPLAUSE
Val
Val. I am sceptical of the promise
of a bridge from Northern Ireland to
Scotland as somebody who couldn’t
build a bridge from London to
London, as somebody said this week.
The Garden Bridge. There are indeed
many longer bridges in the world,
and over difficult terrain and
water, but most are not built over a
munitions dump, because there is a
munitions dump in the middle of the
Irish Sea. It’s been there since the
Second World War and nobody knows
where the musicians are, they
regularty
regularly wash up on beaches on the
regularty wash up on beaches on the
Ayrshire coast.
regularly wash up on beaches on the
Ayrshire coast. I’m not happy about
driving over a bridge in a storm
that’s built on a munitions dump!
Apparently there’s about a million
tonnes of is discarded after the
Second World War, and they are in
Beaufort Dyke in the Irish Sea.
Beaufort Dyke in the Irish See. It
Beaufort Dyke in the Irish Sea. It
certainly makes for an interesting
journey! Alex? I disagree with the
gentleman who said, if it was any
other politician, we would be
treating this more seriously. I
wouldn’t, and if any other
politician had proposed this I would
still say it’s a nonsense, and a
nonsense which has almost zero
chance of happening. You might as
well propose to build a bridge to
Norway while we are at it. Don’t
Norway whila we are at it. Don’t
forget that
Norway while we are at it. Don’t
forget that Eurotunnel was, for many
79575-
years, derided as a ludicrous idea.
People had been talking about that
for hundreds of years, Napoleon had
for hundreds of years, Napolaon had
a plan to build
for hundreds of years, Napoleon had
a plan to build a tunnel under the
English Channel. It’s also somebody
that nobody apart from I think
Ariana
Arlene Foster actually wants. Even
Ariana Foster actually wants. Even
if it
Arlene Foster actually wants. Even
if it were built, and Val McDermid
rates the right points about the
difficulty, it will take at least 30
years to do it, by which time plenty
years to do it, by which time planty
of
years to do it, by which time plenty
of the people here tonight will have
little opportunity to use it.
LAUGHTER
FACE BIG OVER EACH OTHER.
There are people under 30 in this
audience! I think the gentleman had
an important point, which is that
ambition is important for our
country. If you look at what our
great grandparents achieved in the
Victorian era in terms of building
the bridge and connecting our
country the rail network, in terms
of investing hugely in the
infrastructure which has seen us
infrastmclure which has seen us
grow and
infrastructure which has seen us
grow and develop, building up so
much of the infrastructure we now
much of the infrastmclure we now
enjoy, this is
much of the infrastructure we now
enjoy, this is something that we
should be proud of. We should be
looking around the country and
looking at the whole UK and seeing
where the opportunities are, and
there are opportunities to invest,
there are some serious
opportunities, and I hope some of
the projects we build will stay open
in bad weather, unlike the
Queensferry bridge, and I hope that
some of the areas we make
investments in will be delivered
on-time
on—time and on budget, London Bridge
on-time and on budget, London Bridge
station.
on—time and on budget, London Bridge
station. We have got a good track
record here. This is not Berlin
record here. This is not Bertin
airport which
record here. This is not Berlin
airport which is now A0 years late.
airport which is now 40 years late.
Tom is wrong
airport which is now A0 years late.
Tom is wrong about the bridge,
because the bridge has closed once
since it was opened two and a half
years ago, and it’s remained open on
more than 30 patients when the
previous route which would have
closed because of high winds and,
unlike most of Boris’s projects,
that bridge was bought in under
budget. But it has closed down. The
claim was it would never closed as a
result of high winds. I completely
understand the frustration of people
understand the fmstration of peopla
when
understand the frustration of people
when the bridge was closed. I had a
ten hour round trip to a funeral in
Aberdeen on Tuesday because the
bﬂdge
bridge was closed, but my point is
that this bridge has remained, it’s
the first time it’s closed, and it’s
remained open on 30 occasions when
the previous bridge used to close,
so let’s get this in perspective. A
leader of the Conservative Party in
Scotland, acting leader, ended up
with egg all over his face yesterday
because he was criticising the
design of the bridge, and it turned
out he’d convened the committee that
approved the design.
Lets plot the point—scoring to one
Lets plot the point-scoring to one
side. One
Lets plot the point—scoring to one
side. One small point about our
great Victorian heritage, and
engineering achievements were
extraordinary but labour was much
cheaper then and a lot of people
cheaper then and a lot of peopla
died.
cheaper then and a lot of people
died. Let’s take a question from
Mark Fowlie. With drug deaths in
Mark Fowlie. with dmg deaths in
Dundee
Mark Fowlie. With drug deaths in
Dundee expected to rise, are we
doing enough to prevent this? We
have been talking about putting it
in perspective. Dundee has the
highest level of drug—related deaths
highest level of duly-related deaths
in
highest level of drug—related deaths
in Scotland and Scotland has the
highest level of duly-related deaths
in Europe.
highest level of drug—related deaths
in Europe. The SNP has been in
government for about 13 years. It’s
not looking good on your record. You
cannot blame the SNP government
wholly for this because drugs policy
is controlled from Westminster. Do
you take any responsibility? Of
course my colleagues in the Scottish
Government will take responsible tea
for this and more importantly they
are taking action. As you will be
aware, there will be a drugs summit
in Glasgow, there will be two drugs
summit, the British covenant have
organised one but the Scottish
Government have organised one which
will take evidence from people who
have lived experience of the drugs
crisis. That is the crucial
difference between the Scottish
Government summit and the British
government summit. Like the Dundee
project that looked at the causes of
dmg deaths in
drug deaths in this city, the
Scottish Government summit will hear
evidence from people at the heart of
the crisis. I think what’s clear is
that the approach to date hasn’t
worked. Do you think part of the
problem is the cuts that the
government has made to this region’s
alcohol and drug... It’s a much more
complex problem than that. There are
lots of things feeding into the
crisis including poverty, mental
health issues, not
health issues, notjust life
health issues, not just life
poverty.
health issues, notjust life
poverty, but poverty of ambition.
The Scottish affairs committee at
Westminster chaired by my colleague
Pete Wishart held up a wide—ranging
Pete wishart held up a wide-ranging
enquiry into
Pete Wishart held up a wide—ranging
enquiry into the causes of drug
enquiry into the causes of dmg
deaths
enquiry into the causes of drug
deaths in Scotland in the last
Parliament, and heard evidence from
Partiament, and heard evidence from
all sorts
Parliament, and heard evidence from
all sorts of people and came to the
conclusion that what we needed was a
pub“:
public health approach to this and
we need to de—criminalise those who
we need to de-criminalise those who
are just using
we need to de—criminalise those who
are just using small amounts. Some
of my colleagues at Westminster,
such as Alison Thewliss, Tommy
Sheppard and Ronnie Karen have
pushed the idea of having safe drug
pushed the idea of having safe dmg
consumption
pushed the idea of having safe drug
consumption rooms, places where
peopla ran
people can safely consume drugs in a
peopla ran safely consume drugs in a
safe
people can safely consume drugs in a
safe environment. We have been
pushing the Westminster government
to agree to this and so far they
have not agreed. I am interested in
a blame game here. I am interested
in getting to the root of the crisis
and finding out what the solutions
are. I think in Dundee steps have
been done to do that already with
the project you have because you
have listened to the people who are
suffering at the heart of the
crisis. That is what the Scottish
Government summit will do in
February and that evidence, the
lived experience of the crisis will
be fed into the British government’s
next summit as well.
next summit as well. This is one of
those questions where cooperation
matters so much. Because how we work
together across all our communities
as a direct impact. Drugs don’t
as a direct impact. Dmgs don’t
recognise
as a direct impact. Drugs don’t
recognise borders in that sense.
They don’t recognise county or
council or national borders within
our country at all. And we know how
many dmgs are
many drugs are coming in from
overseas and how they come through
our country in various different
ways. And what about consumption
mmours
rumours that the SNP have pushed for
and the Westminster government...
For various reasons we have actually
tried consumption rooms, not here in
the UK but around Europe, including
the Netherlands, where it has
attracted serious social issues,
from other neighbouring countries
into the Netherlands the stop they
into the Nethertands the stop they
tried it
into the Netherlands the stop they
tried it in Switzerland with similar
tried it in Switzeriand with similar
problams. It
tried it in Switzerland with similar
problems. It isn’t an answer unless
problams. It isn’t an answer unless
it is part of a
problems. It isn’t an answer unless
it is part of a much wider strategy.
That’s why I welcome the fact the
government has organised the Glasgow
conference in February. I think it’s
really important. I am a little bit
surprised that it was only when that
was organised at the Scottish
Government organised their summit
for the day before. The Scottish
Government has a
Government has 3 drugs task force
Government has a drugs task force
set up some
Government has 3 drugs task force
set up some time ago with someone
reading it so this is not the first
reaction. The Scottish Government
has set up their summit in Glasgow
because the British government
summit would not set up with hearing
evidence from people at the heart of
the crisis. Forgive me, as you know
very well, joanna,
very well, Joanna, the SNP has been
very well, joanna, the SNP has been
in government
very well, Joanna, the SNP has been
in government here now for over a
decade. As you have been in London.
Dmgs deaths in
Drugs deaths in Scotland are three
Dmgs deaths in Scotland are three
times
Drugs deaths in Scotland are three
times that of the rest of the UK.
This is a very serious social
crisis. We need a joint approach.
This is something we have to work on
together and not have separate
conferences simply in order to fly a
conferences simply in order to ﬂy a
ﬂag when
conferences simply in order to fly a
flag when cooperation is much more
ﬂag when cooperation is much more
important. The
flag when cooperation is much more
important. The woman with the blonde
hair. I
hair. Isat
important. The woman with the blonde
hair. I sat on one of the working
EWUPS
groups for the care review, the
groups for the rare review, the
Scottish
groups for the care review, the
Scottish independent care review and
Scottish independent rare review and
it would
Scottish independent care review and
it would be great for people to
acknowledge that we now know the
trauma and poverty and adversities
peopla face
people face that are pushing people
peopla face that are pushing peopla
to drugs and
people face that are pushing people
to drugs and they feel they have no
choice. Young people in Dundee are
in crisis with their mental health
because of the trauma of the poverty
they live in. It needs to be an
approach on everything, definitely.
The gentleman over here. The problem
is that it’s not today or yesterday
that this problem has affected
Dundee. It’s all very well to talk
about summits and new measures, but
they don’t sound like measures,
controlled consumption, it doesn’t
sound like a measure that is likely
to tackla
to tackle such an overwhelming
to tackla such an overwhelming
crisis
to tackle such an overwhelming
crisis that has been going on for so
long. It needs a multifactorial,
multi—country, multi—agency
multipronged approach. Perhaps look
at other towns across the world that
have had this problem and found a
“Y
way to solve it. I think a little
piecemeal and incremental ways to
think about tackling it are just not
going to work.
going to work. Alex? I am glad
listening to the elected
representatives hear that they are
not playing a blame game or
indulging in something as
constructive as arguments as to who
is than the other person’s summit.
The gentleman here is absolutely
right that it is a wide—ranging
right that it is a wide-ranging
problem.
right that it is a wide—ranging
problem. We still don’t actually, I
think, despite a lot of good work
that has been done, including by the
Scottish affairs committee at
Westminster, that we don’t
understand why the problem is so
much worse in Glasgow and Dundee
than it is for instance in Liverpool
or Newcastle, cities with similar
histories and demographics in some
histories and demographic in some
respects. But
histories and demographics in some
respects. But it is. And while it is
respects. But it is. And whila it is
tme that
respects. But it is. And while it is
true that cuts to services are not
tme that cuts to services are not
the only
true that cuts to services are not
the only reason that things have got
worse, it is also reasonable to
worse, it is also reasonabla to
suppose
worse, it is also reasonable to
suppose the cuts to those services
have not helped. The most recent
Scottish Government budget has given
some of that money back to some of
these services, making up for
previous productions, and that is
obviously welcome. It is possible
obviously welcome. It is possibla
that
obviously welcome. It is possible
that the idea of safe consumption
rooms might alleviate matters in
Dundee, Glasgow and elsewhere, but I
don’t think even proponents of that
approach really believe that it is a
long term solution. But at the
moment, the notion of trying to do
what ran
what can be done to stop matters
what ran be done to stop matters
getting any
what can be done to stop matters
getting any worse is probably the
first step. Stabilising the
situation, which is a fairly
depressing way of looking at it, but
the notion there is a quick solution
to this, I think is misguided,
unfortunately. If only that were the
use. A
case. A lot of things come into it
use. A lot of things come into it
in terms of
case. A lot of things come into it
in terms of poverty, mental health,
educational achievement, aspiration,
family breakdown, all these things
are involved but it makes it
difficult to isolate the single
difficult to isolate the singla
thing
difficult to isolate the single
thing that will make a real
difference, except in terms perhaps
of intervention on a patient by
patient basis. What’s going wrong in
Scotland? We have the highest death
rate in Europe in Dundee and the
highest death rate in Europe in
Scotland. Those aspects like
poverty.
poverty, trauma, lack of ambition
and prosperity. People will take
drugs and we have to make it as safe
as possibla so
as possible so we can ultimately
as possibla so we ran ultimately
help
as possible so we ran ultimately
help them to
as possible so we can ultimately
help them to find a way out of this.
In Dundee, the professor of forensic
In Dundee, the professor offorensic
science
In Dundee, the professor of forensic
science who specialises in formally
legal highs, the kind of drugs being
developed as street drugs, there is
no control over what is in these
drugs will stop they hit the streets
and nobody knows what they take.
They take overdoses without even
knowing they are taking overdoses. I
think the way to go is the
decriminalisation of drugs. We
control them, the government
controls them, licenses them, get
them from the chemist, the quality
is controlled and people know what
is controlled and peopla know what
they are
is controlled and people know what
they are taking. Gradually over time
you work with people to break the
you work with peopla to break the
habit.
you work with people to break the
habit. But while they are still in
habit. But whila they are still in
the habit,
habit. But while they are still in
the habit, you make it safe for them
to do it and raise money through
taxes. APPLAUSE
Would you support that, Ian? I don’t
think we should come to any knee
jerk quick fixes. Over 3000 people
died last year and that’s 3000 too
many. I had a constituent who lost
her son to drugs. It’s a
heartbreaking story and something
that should never have happened. We
have to find a way through this
crisis. It is multifaceted, as has
been said, there is no doubt about
that, and it leads back to poverty
but also services. This blame game
at Westminster is controlling drug
at Westminster is controlling dmg
policy so we
at Westminster is controlling drug
policy so we can’t do anything about
it in Scotland doesn’t answer the
question of why the Scottish drugs
death rate is much higher and wide
Dundee’s rate is much
Dundee’s rate is much higher. Maybe
we could do it tonight,
we could do it tonight, maybe both
these conferences could commit to
come together and lets get the
evidence on why Scotland’s death
rate is much higher than the rest of
the UK when the rest of the UK has
the exact same drugs policy. I would
suggest part of the problem is a
slashing of local government budgets
slashing of [oral government budgets
where
slashing of local government budgets
where the services are, a slashing
of alcohol and drugs support. The
NHS in Scotland is in crisis, and
there is an education system that is
trying to teach kids where there is
more loaded on in terms of how kids
are living and you can spot those
are living and you ran spot those
signs earty on.
are living and you can spot those
signs early on. It’s a failure in
signs earty on. It’s a failure in
pub“:
signs early on. It’s a failure in
public policy and both governments
need to take responsivity for that
so we don’t have more people losing
so we don’t have more peopla losing
their son
so we don’t have more people losing
their son is like my constituent.
Let me point out that 1000 died last
year. Not 3000, but it is still a
year. Mot 3000, but it is still a
lot. Maybe
year. Not 3000, but it is still a
lot. Maybe we will have that
conversation about getting the two
conferences together. A lot of you
have your hands up. Apologies I
could not get round more of you on
this important topic, but we are out
of time. Next week we will be in
Weymouth, then Middlesbrough.
You can call
You can callus or go to the website
You ran all us or go to the website
if you want to be
You can callus or go to the website
if you want to be in the audience
will stop if you want to carry on
talking about these topics then you
talking about these topic then you
ran join
ranjoin Rick
talking about these topics then you
can join Rick Edwards
canjoin Rick Edwards and guests on
ranjoin Rick Edwards and guests on
question Time
canjoin Rick Edwards and guests on
question Time extra time on 5 Live
right now. Thank you to the panel
and thank you to all of you here for
coming along and putting across your
questions. Thank you to you at home
for watching and listening. From
Dundee, goodbye.
This is not our culture.
Some would argue
this is not any of our business.
People don’t like it when they see
blood.
It’s easy to go to the supermarket
and buy beef without seeing
the slaughter.
These pilot whales
should just be left alone.
They don’t need to be slaughtered
forfood orfor tradition.
Check this. I’m tacking more
than just big issues tonight.
VAR!
Oh, gosh...
Order your fundraising pack now
so you can get loads
of wicked ideas
and get your kit on to raise money
for Sport Relief.
Laura, you messaged us
earliersaying, remind me,
shout out to Freddie
in Downing Street and
the penis reshuffle story
and Margaret Beckett by mistake.
I don’t understand
what any of that means.
There are quite a few things
in that sentence to unpack.
I didn’t know you are going
to read out the message.
I wasjust going to remind you!
0K, well, remind us
of the substance.
The substance.
We need to say hello
to Freddie and Ryan,
who work at Number Ten,
who were in Downing Street
this morning, who said,
when’s your next Newscast
and will you give us a shout out?
Sojob done.
Here you are.
There are people in Downing Street
listening to this important podcast.
Number two, once a reshuffle had
a very, very near accident
because there was a plan
in government to found
a new department until somebody
noticed the acronym was P—E—N—I—S.
And that government department
never came into being.
What would have been its business?
It would have been
a cock—up if it had.
Very good!
Anyway, welcome to Newscast.
Newscast!
Newscast. Newscast.
Newscast from the BBC.
Going to Pizza Express in Woking
is an unusual thing for me to do.
You are a white, privileged male.
Nobody has a BLEEP
clue what Brexit is.
This is not an elitist issue.
This is a quality of life issue.
I urge everybody to find closure
and let the healing begin.
You have stolen my dreams and my
childhood with your empty words.
You are failing us.
It’s Chris Mason at Westminster.
Hang on, what about Margaret
Beckett and penises?
Well, the Margaret Beckett thing has
nothing to do with the department
called PENIS that never
came into being.
Somebody told me this week,
when I was researching the history
of reshuffles going bad,
that actually Margaret Beckett
becoming Foreign Secretary
was the product of a reshuffle under
New Labour when the dominoes kind
of fell in the wrong place,
and it was a bit of an accident.
I haven’t put that to her,
and if she’s hearing this she might
feel very differently,
but that is part of reshuffle
mythology, including somebody
who didn’t get a job
because the post—it that had his
name on it fell off the board,
and they only realised once
all thejobs had been given out,
so they had to make a job for him.
It’s Laura in Westminster.
Adam in Westminster.
And we’re joined in the studio...
By Selma Shah, former special
adviser to Sajid Javid.
who?
He used to be a thing
in Westminster.
I think he still might be
a thing, with a very
interesting few months ahead.
So...
It’s the thing all political
journalists and obsessives live for,
which is a reshuffle.